# dota_nba_pay_analysis
### This research project was done as a final project for a data science course taken at UCSD.  
  
### Summary of our project:  
In our project we sought to explore how the quickly growing eSports scene would matchup to the NBA's recent growth as over the past few years eSports have become more popular and widespread. We chose to specifically explore Dota2 as the eSport in our study so we compared the top earners in the Dota2 scene to the top earners in the NBA over the past 7 years using datasets acquired from https://www.esportsearnings.com/games/231-dota-2 and http://www.espn.com/nba/salaries respectively. We chose to compare monetary gains as this would be one of the best numerical indicators as to the 'growth' of the scene.

In our EDA we compared the distributions of player earnings among the top earners of the past 7 years and very interestingly we saw from our graph that the distributions were very similar both in peak and tails. From this graph we could conclude that between the two sports the discrepency between higher and lower earners were almost identical and since the graph was right skewed we could also conclude that there was more of a desparity between the highest and middle earners while there were fewer players earning a below average pay. Another graph we drew up from our data was from the total yearly earnings of players normalized respectively and we saw an exponential increase in pay over the past few years for Dota2 which we expected since we have witnessed the boom in the eSports industry but even more suprising was we saw an equally sharp increase in pay for NBA players which was quite surprising considering how much more established the NBA was as a franchise and a staple of televised sports. Lastly, we created a log scaled graph of raw yearly earnings, rather than normalized as the previous graph was, and as expected compared to Dota2 the NBA's total monetary worth is far and away much larger than Dota2's but we can see that there has been impressive catchup by the eSports over the past few years which is probably due to the NBA being older and much more established overall.

To test our hypothesis it would be advantageous to wait a few years to acquire more data but if we were to do it now, we could use the Scikit-Learn library available in python to analyze yearly growth. With more data we could build a much more accurate model, using a myriad of available models such as linear regression, logistic regression, knn classifiers and so on, to fit our data onto and make predictions for the future projected earnings of Dota2 and the NBA based on previous years earnings and furthermore by adding more features potentially through more data collection we could continously improve our model. From our analysis we expect to see the NBA's growth to plateau out in the next few years as it just had a massive spike and the same can be said for Dota2 as the growth in the last 2 years has not been too impressive although the stability instead of going downhill is still a positive indicator into the future of the eSport.

Our analysis is also quite limited though as we were unable to include data of earnings based on brand deals, sponsorships or even actual salary of Dota2 players from their organizations as that information is not public and instead opt to use tournament earnings that are made public. We also could not account for the instability of the eSport compared to the NBA which as previously mentioned has been around for much longer and proven to be more stable. We would have also liked to include information regarding viewership which is not really available currently as the earliest records of view statistics for Dota2 has only been over the past two years which is not enough for our experiment.

In terms of impact on society,  this experiment is a good indicator that these days there is much more available content besides the traditional content such as sports and that these other ventures are to be taken seriously considering how much money has been put into them. These are still early days for eSports so we should not be quick to judge but so far eSports has been more and more mainstream from being a very niche genre of content to being more publicly accepted. Furthermore we can see that these aren't just games anymore and that people can really make a living from it, instead of having it on the side while having to work other jobs people are able to put their sole focus on the games they compete in much like how NBA players have to train daily, attend practices, analyze replays of past matches, these are all aspects practiced by eSports players as well.
